Good morning.
Welcome to the introduction
to the iPhone Developer Tools.
This is session 901.
My name is Michael Jurewitz.
I'm Apple's Developer Tools evangelist.
So my job is to work with developers
like yourselves to make sure that you're
getting the most out of the tools.
And we've really got a great session here
for you this morning to do just that,
to make sure we speed you
along in your development,
that you understand exactly what you
need to do to write iPhone applications.
So, welcome to a new day and a new
mobile development platform.
We really think that it's the best mobile
development experience in the world,
bar none.
Just for a show of hands, I'm curious,
how many of you are
experienced Mac developers?
Just raise your hand.
Okay, smattering.
How many of you are new to
Mac development or new to
iPhone development as a whole?
Raise your hands.
Excellent, good.
All right,
so we've got the right audience.
We wrote the description correctly.
So today we're going to be trying to
take you on a tour through the tools,
a journey,
to make sure that you understand
exactly how they need to be used in
the development process as a whole.
And if there's three things that
you take out of this session,
I want you to understand a few things
about our tools at a high level.
The first is that our
tools are streamlined.
They're there to help
keep you productive,
to keep you moving forward
in your development.
We always want to make sure that we're
staying out of your way and allowing
you to do your job as a developer.
Our tools are well integrated.
We've got a wide variety
of tools on the platform,
but they all work seamlessly together
so that you can transition from writing
code to working on your interface
to performance analysis without
having to switch your mental model or
without having to worry about syncing
between these different applications.
And finally, our tools are complete.
On a lot of other platforms,
you end up having to purchase
things like performance
analysis tools or design tools,
and we actually provide
everything for you out of the box.
Thank you.
The real goal here is that when
we're done with this session,
I want you guys to be able to walk out
of this door and get right down to code.
Have enough of a working knowledge
with the tools that you're
proficient to begin writing that
next great iPhone application.
So let's start this journey and
go through and take you through
all the different knowledge that
you're going to need to get started.
So we'll be focusing on five tools today.
And the real great thing about these
tools is that these are the exact same
tools that we use for Mac development.
So if you've done Mac development,
a lot of this is going to
be very familiar to you.
And if you haven't done Mac development,
as much of you have not,
this is great because what
you learn for iPhone easily
transitions back over to the Mac.
So first, we'll talk about Xcode,
our integrated IDE.
Next, we'll talk about Interface Builder,
our design tool for your
iPhone and Mac applications.
will talk about the iPhone Simulator,
which allows you to run your iPhone
applications on your desktop.
And we'll talk about Instruments,
a powerful analysis tool that helps
bring context to your analysis
to help you better understand how
your application is performing.
And finally,
we'll finish up with another of
our performance tools called Shark,
which gives you instruction
level accuracy in your profiling
with incredibly low overhead.
So the journey we're going to take today
is going to be through writing code,
through testing in the simulator,
designing your interface,
analyzing that code with instruments,
moving that code over to your iPhone,
and then finally testing and
analyzing on the iPhone itself.
So let's start with Xcode.
Now since many of you are new,
I just want to give you a grab bag of
some of the powerful features that we
have at your disposal so you understand
all that the IDE is here to do for you.
So when you first open up Xcode,
you're greeted with a welcome window.
It's got a great jumping off point
to tons of resources to help speed
you along in your development.
So things such as links to
documentation for the iPhone,
or even links to mailing lists that you
can rely on your peers and ask questions,
and also talk with Apple engineers.
The real focus on Xcode as the IDE has
evolved over the years has been to keep
you focused on your source code and
not force you to get out of that mode.
So we've got a very
powerful source editor.
Like many IDEs out there,
we support code completion.
So that as you're writing your methods,
we auto-complete for you along
with parameters to help speed you
along and keep you productive.
We also that you've used several
times all in the same scope.
So we have this feature
we call Edit All in Scope,
which simply allows you to engage and
begin renaming a set of variables right
in line in your source and know that
it's going to be accurately making this
change for you and only in the scope,
in your local scope.
We also come with tons of built-in
documentation so that right out of
the bat you can read up on all the
resources you need for iPhone development
and keep these in sync with what's
on the developer website to make sure
that you are always moving forward and
always have the most recent knowledge.
Now, along with this,
we also make it easy for you to get
the information about your projects and
about the classes that you're using.
So, for example,
you can command-double-click on a
symbol and jump directly to where it's
declared in a header right from within
the interface and get to the media
information that you're looking for.
Similarly, you can option double click on
the same symbol and will jump
right to the documentation for
it in our documentation viewer.
These are some pretty nice power user
features that you should use in your
development to speed yourself along.
We've got a powerful refactoring engine,
which lets you make large-scale
structural changes to your application
with the confidence that you're
not going to be changing the logical
flow of how your application works.
We integrate directly with Subversion,
CVS, and Perforce for source control
so that you can browse your
repositories and integrate them
directly into your projects.
You'll notice on the left-hand
side of the screen that we even
show you when you've modified files
relative to your source route,
for example.
And when you've done that,
we even provide you with a
convenient way of seeing just
what it is that you've changed.
Now, even when you go to build,
we try to keep you
engaged in your editor.
So we give you message bubbles on
your build errors so that you know
exactly where they're happening and
can diagnose and fix them quickly.
We also integrate the debugger
directly into your editor.
You'll notice at the very top of
the editor you've got a few debugger
controls that you can step in,
step out, bring up your console,
see your different stack frames,
all from right within your editor.
What's more,
you can do this whether you're using
the simulator or iPhone itself.
You can also mouse over symbols
as you're debugging them,
and we give you live
information about them,
both on the iPhone
simulator and on iPhone.
You can even set breakpoints and
modify their attributes right in
your source with message bubbles.
So if you need to do something like
set conditions or enable or disable,
you can do that quickly and easily.
And if you prefer a more
traditional debugger experience,
we've even got that for you too.
So that's a bit about some of
the features that we have in the
editor to keep you productive.
And now I'd like to bring up Rick Ballard
from the Xcode engineering team to
walk you a little bit through the
project structure of an Xcode project.
Rick?
Thanks, Mike.
In Xcode, new projects are born in
the new project assistant.
The new project assistant gives you a
set of out-of-the-box templates that you
can just create and build and go and have
something useful to start working on,
nothing needed.
You're going to want to start
out by choosing the template
most similar to the sort of
application that you want to design.
And once you've created it,
you'll be taken to Xcode's
new project window,
or Xcode's project window.
This is your hub in Xcode.
You can see this project comes
with all the sources needed to
build the type of application that
you chose right out of the box.
A new project comes with one target,
seen on the left-hand
side in the Targets group.
And your target knows how to take that
source code that your project has and
turn it into your iPhone application.
If you want to add more
targets to your project,
you can use the new Target Assistant.
And in particular,
you may want to add a static
library target to your project
to enable you to share code at
development time between multiple
applications that you're developing.
When you add a new
target to your project,
it'll show up in the targets
group on the left-hand side.
Xcode projects are the container for all
your source code and related information.
And your projects contain their targets.
An Xcode target is a blueprint for
taking that source code and turning
it into one of your products,
like a library or an application.
You'll see in Xcode,
in the upper left-hand corner,
there's an icon that
represents your project.
Your project provides you
access to all the source code
that that project manages,
and you can browse it, rearrange it,
and organize it as you see fit.
The targets in that project operate
on the project's source code in
build phases that process it.
For example,
a compile sources build phase,
which runs a compiler on all the source
code files to produce the output.
You can see these build phases
contain the same file references
that your project vends.
Beyond just files and targets,
the project window is also your hub
for more detailed configuration.
If you choose the project icon in the
upper left and double click or use
the Get Info button on the toolbar,
you'll be taken to Xcode's
project settings window.
Project Settings gives you access
to the high-level core settings
that affect your entire project.
Likewise, if you double-click or
get info on a target icon,
you'll be taken to the core settings
that affect just that target.
Things like what other targets
it depends on at build time,
so when you build one,
the other will build automatically.
Or what libraries that target links.
The Build tab at either the project
or target level gives you access to
Xcode's advanced build property interface
for more detailed customization.
You can set these properties on the
project level to affect all your targets,
or you can set it on an individual
target to just affect that target.
To give you a taste of this,
I'd like to introduce Clark Cox.
He's going to build us and run an
Xcode project from the template.
I'm going to show you what it takes
to get started building your first
iPhone application with Xcode.
I'm going to launch Xcode.
Then I'm going to create a new
project by going to the File menu
and choosing New Project.
This is the familiar New Project Wizard.
I'm going to create a
utility application.
A utility application is a program sort
of like weather or stocks on the iPhone
where data is displayed on one view,
and the user is allowed to
switch the view to a settings
view on the other side.
So I'm going to choose that,
name my project,
And there it is.
It's been created.
To show that this is a complete
application directly out of the box,
I'm going to build and run
it by going to the Build menu
and choosing Build and Run.
Xcode compiles all of my sources,
packages them up, links them,
launches the simulator.
Because I do not have a device attached,
it knows to do this automatically.
So here we have the application
running in the simulator.
All of the functionality you would
expect from such an application is there.
Now I'm going to go back to Xcode,
filter to find my root view controller.
And then use the symbol pop-up
to find the toggle view method.
This is the method responsible
for actually flipping the view.
I'm going to place a breakpoint
by clicking in the gutter.
Xcode knows by virtue of the fact
that I've placed a breakpoint
that I'd like to start debugging.
I don't have to relaunch the application,
I don't have to rebuild it,
the debugger attaches
if it isn't already,
and we're good to go.
This time, when I flip the view,
I get dropped back into Xcode,
and you see my breakpoint was hit.
All of the features that Mike mentioned
earlier are available to me.
I can mouse over and inspect variables,
I can step and continue all the things
you would expect from the Xcode debugger.
Thank you very much.
And now, back to slides.
Thanks, Clark.
Later this week,
we have some more sessions that will
go much more in-depth with Xcode.
Later today,
if you've used other IDEs like
Visual Studio or Eclipse,
I highly recommend the Xcode
for Visual Studio and Eclipse
Developer session at 3:30 in Marina.
And tomorrow,
we have two more sessions that will go
into more of the power user features
to help you get the most out of Xcode.
Xcode is your hub for
the developer tools.
It's where you'll start,
where you'll probably
spend most of your time,
and you'll find that it integrates
well with all of our other tools,
leading you to them as you need them.
So we started out by
putting together some code,
and Clark has showed us how
to take that code and launch
it up in iPhone Simulator.
Let's go a little more in
depth on what exactly iPhone
Simulator is and how it works.
iPhone Simulator is Apple's newest
addition to the Developer Tools,
and it's designed to get you
up and running with your iPhone
application as quickly as possible.
You should know that iPhone
Simulator is an API simulator.
It is not a hardware simulator.
When you build your iPhone
application for iPhone Simulator,
your iPhone application
is an Intel binary,
and it gets access to all the powerful
hardware in your development Macintosh.
It runs, your iPhone app runs as
another process on your Mac,
just like a Mac app.
You may be used to,
if you've done any Mac development,
AppKit, Apple's user interface
framework for Mac OS X.
AppKit sits on top of other frameworks,
lower level like Foundation,
Core Foundation,
and they work together to
provide the Cocoa Stack for Mac.
iPhone OS is very similar.
We have a different higher-level
framework called UI Kit.
UIKit sits on top of iPhone OS's
versions of the same lower-level
frameworks like Foundation.
These frameworks are for
the most part similar,
but built for iPhone OS.
When you build for iPhone Simulator,
you're actually using
a hybrid of the two.
iPhone Simulator takes UIKit and
layers it on top of Mac OS X's
foundation and lower-level frameworks.
So when your iPhone app
runs in iPhone Simulator,
it's using a specially
simulator-built version of UIKit,
but using the same low-level frameworks
that all your Mac OS X apps use.
For the most part,
this is transparent because most of
iPhone OS's low-level frameworks,
like Foundation,
offer just about the same
APIs as Mac OS X's Foundation.
So your iPhone app can go from Simulator
to iPhone OS and not notice a difference.
In a few cases, like Security Framework,
Mac OS X offers a different
set of APIs than iPhone OS.
When your iPhone app needs to
use a framework like Security,
you'll want to write code to both use
iPhone OS's API and Mac OS X's API.
You can conditionally compile
this API using a macro like
Target iPhone Simulator.
So when your code runs for iPhone
Simulator using Mac OS X's Security,
you'll use one set of API.
and when it runs on iPhone OS,
you'll use a different set of API,
and you can go back and
forth with no problem.
iPhone Simulator's biggest
advantage is that it gives you
incredibly quick turnaround.
You can go from debugging your iPhone
Simulator app to making new code changes,
building, and right back in the debugger
with extremely low overhead.
iPhone Simulator also lets you use
all the great built-in debugging
goodness that you may be used to for
Mac OS X or you may be about to discover.
Goodness like DTrace,
the lightweight system tracing utility
which lets you build probes that
give detailed information about your
process without affecting performance.
And it's Zombies,
which let you keep some information
behind when your objects are deallocated
to help you track over-release problems
or problems of touching dead objects.
Or GuardMalloc,
which lets you easily track
down buffer overruns and other
memory corruption issues.
All these and more are
described in TechNote 2124:
Debugging Magic,
which contains a host of useful
tips and tricks for debugging
Mac OS X applications that you can apply
directly to your iPhone applications
by running them in iPhone Simulator.
Once you're up and running
with iPhone Simulator,
you're going to want to start
building your interface.
Apple offers a first-class
interface design tool,
and we call it Interface Builder.
Interface Builder supports Koko's
model-view-controller paradigm,
and in particular,
is designed to let you lay out your views
and connect them to your controllers.
Interface Builder gives you both
reusability and flexibility.
Reusability because it makes it easy to
share your custom view and controller
subclasses and use them as appropriate.
And flexibility because it's a great tool
for getting up with rapid prototyping
and iterating quickly as needed.
This is Interface Builder.
Out of the box,
it's very easy to use and very addictive.
Interface Builder offers a
"what you see is what you get"
style of interface design,
where views automatically grow
to fit the space as needed and
snap into place with smart guides.
In Interface Builder,
you're both going to want
to choose your views,
lay them out where you want them to be,
and then connect your objects together.
To establish the relationships between
your objects and your interface,
you use Interface Builder's connections,
like here, where we just connected our
view object to its controller.
Interface Builder's main
document window is your ZIB file.
X-I-B, or ZIB.
It contains the top-level objects
that make up your interface.
Your ZIP file contains a set of
instructions for instantiating the
objects that make up your interface
and setting the properties on them
to make them behave as you want.
They don't contain the code
to make that interface run.
Instead, that code comes from UIKit or
your own custom subclasses.
When you build, your ZIP file is
compiled into a Nib file,
which is a compiled representation
of the instructions to instantiate
those objects and set the properties.
What this means is that Interface
Builder is not a code gen tool.
It lets you specify what you want,
and the frameworks do
all the heavy lifting.
When you start out in Interface
Builder's document window,
it'll come up in icon view.
But when you're developing for iPhone OS,
you may find it useful
to switch to list view,
because instead of just displaying
the top-level objects in your nib,
it will display the complete hierarchy
that makes up all your instances and lets
you drill down and set what you want.
Interface Builder's library offers you
all the views that you might want to
use to drag right into your interface.
You can easily filter if you know
exactly what you're looking for,
or you can use the library's built-in
categorizations to help you quickly
browse through the different objects
that we offer for your interface.
Once you've got an object in your nib,
if you inspect it,
you'll get properties at the beginning
that allow you to specify how your object
should behave and how it should look.
An overview of all its connections
we call outlets and actions,
which are the relationships
between the objects in your Nib.
A smart sizing inspector,
which allows you to fine-tune placement
and specify how auto-sizing rules will
work for when your interface rotates
or sub-superviews expand and contract.
and class management.
You probably don't just want to use
all of the generic superclass objects
that come in Interface Builder.
You want to write your own
custom subclasses in many cases,
your own view subclass, for example.
And when you do,
you specify what subclass of
the interface object you dragged
in that you want to use in the
class field of this inspector.
Interface Builder will take your
class name and talk to Xcode for
you automatically to pull out of
the header file what actions and
what outlets your subclass supports.
Interface Builder stays in
sync with Xcode all the time.
So as you make edits to your subclasses,
Interface Builder will know and
present the new outlets and actions
and behave as you would like.
Interface Builder is a great
way to design your interface.
It's really easy to start using.
And frankly,
Interface Builder is a lot of fun.
It's really a cool tool.
To show you exactly how much fun,
I'd like to invite Clark back up
to demo building us an interface.
Thanks, Rick.
Okay, I've got a simple project here.
I want to design an interface for it.
To get started,
I'll use the Groups and Files
tree to navigate to my ZIP file.
If I double-click on that,
it will launch Interface Builder.
Here we have my main ZIP file.
It's a pretty sparse file at this point,
where I'd run this application,
it would do nothing but
display a blank white window.
So we'll have to add some content.
The first thing I need is a view
controller to manage my views.
I'll go to the library,
select an appropriate instance,
drag it out, and drop it in my document.
That instantiates the object,
and as you can see,
it opens a window ready
to receive my view.
First thing I need to do
with this view controller.
As Rick mentioned,
we don't necessarily want
to use the generic class
offered by Interface Builder.
So I'm going to,
with the view controller selected,
go to the Identity tab of the Inspector.
My project has a class
called My View Controller.
I'll start typing.
And as you can see,
Interface Builder knows about
that class by virtue of it
being in my Xcode project.
That's all it takes to change
the class of this instance.
Now, to add actual content,
I need to find a view to
place in the view controller,
so I'll go over to the
library and start searching.
Again, I grab the appropriate instance,
drag it out, and drop it in place.
As you can see,
Interface Builder sizes it
automatically from the space available
and snaps it in place as I drop it.
Now to add some more
visually interesting content.
In this application,
I'd like to have an Edit field in
a bar across the top of the view
and a table view in the bottom.
So I'll go find the navigation
bar that I want to put at the top.
Again, grab an instance.
Grab an instance and drop it into place.
Now for the Edit field,
it's the same process.
I search for a text field,
grab the instance, drop it into place.
Now, Interface Builder knows where
views can go in this bar,
so it does that automatically for me.
But I'd rather not have it.
I'd rather not have it here on the side,
so I'll do it again.
Do it again and drop it into place.
Now that view's in place and there's
one issue that you may not be aware
of looking directly at this view.
What happens when the device is rotated?
Well, Interface Builder allows me to
simulate that by clicking here.
Now, as you can see,
that field looks awfully
small for the space available.
To remedy that, with the field selected,
I'll go to the size tab of the inspector.
I want to make sure that the
field maintains a constant
distance from the left,
top, and right sides of the field.
I also want to make sure
that the text field expands
when its parent view expands.
Now, when I simulate the rotation again,
you can see it automatically
expanded to fill the space.
Now, I need to add the actual table view.
So again,
I'll search in the library,
find the instance I want, drag it out,
and drop it into place.
Interface Builder sizes it
appropriately and gives me guidelines
as to where I could drop it.
Now the interface is visually
complete at this point,
and if I wanted to see what it
would look like on an actual iPhone,
Interface Builder allows me to use the
simulator to simulate the interface.
This launches a test harness in
the simulator with my interface.
I can interact with it just as
I would any iPhone application.
The keyboard comes up when
I click the text field.
And so on.
Okay, so I'm going to quit the simulator
now and return to Interface Builder.
Now the objects in my nib, or in my zib,
need to know about each other.
I need to make sure to tell the app
delegate which view controller to load,
and so on.
To do that,
I'll control drag from the app
delegate to the view controller and
choose the view controller outlet.
Likewise, my view controller needs
to know about its views.
So I'll control drag from the
view controller to the table view
and choose the table view outlet.
And again,
from the view controller to the edit
field and choose the text field outlet.
Now the table view itself needs
to know where to get its data and
whom to ask about certain behavior.
This time, I'll Control-drag from the
table to the view controller,
connect the data source outlet,
and again, for the delegate outlet.
Now, one final connection
that needs to be made,
I need to tell my edit field what to
do when the user has entered some text.
So I'll Control-click on the Edit field
and connect the Did End On Exit event
to my view controller's Add Row method.
At this point,
with all the connections in place,
I'll Save, return to Xcode, Build and Go,
And there's my application
running the simulator.
I can, again,
interact with it just as I would
any other iPhone application.
and that's how to use Interface
Builder to design your iPhone
application's interface.
Thank you and back to slides.
All right, thank you, Clark.
So as you can see,
Interface Builder does a great job
at helping you create your interface,
lay it out on your canvas,
and then connect all the logic together
to make sure that it actually works.
We've got a couple sessions this
week planned on Interface Builder
to really help speed you along.
So later on today,
we have Designing Applications
with Interface Builder,
which will focus on iPhone development
and help you understand a lot of the
core principles behind Interface Builder.
It can seem like it's a bit of magic
if you're not used to tools like this,
but it's actually really
powerful and very deterministic,
I promise.
We also have later in the week,
on Thursday, Mastering Interface Builder.
So after you've had a chance in the
early part of these first few days to
get a good feel for Interface Builder,
we'll help you kick that up a notch
and really take your knowledge
to the next level so that you
can be the most productive as
possible with Interface Builder.
Okay, so we've talked about
designing your interface,
but now let's talk about
analyzing your application.
Now, for the large majority of you
who are used to doing development
in a mobile environment,
this is a very important topic,
so I'm sure that you're used to.
You really need to focus on squeezing
as much speed as possible out of the
applications that you're running on.
And it's the same story on iPhone.
Performance is really,
really important on the iPhone.
I can't stress that enough.
We make it easy to integrate
performance into your workflow,
and it's essential that you do so to
make sure that you're shipping the best
possible application for your customers.
When you look at it,
if you've got two applications
that do the same thing,
which one is the customer going to pick?
The one that's slow or
the one that's fast?
So really make sure that
you're integrating this in your
development cycle from the start.
Now, it's tempting if you're used
to desktop development to just
kind of fall into this lull of,
well, the desktop will take care of it.
There's lots of powerful hardware
out there that obviate a lot of the
problems that I might see otherwise.
So, for instance, your users might have
more memory on a desktop,
and you're not going to notice issues
such as thrashing or just poor usage
of memory quite as much on the desktop.
You might have algorithms that
are way too complex and don't
scale well with additional data.
Again, you'll see these on the desktop,
but the hardware will
often just chew through it.
And there's also wasteful I/O.
It's not a big deal on the
desktop a lot of the times,
although it does hurt.
It's a big deal when you start talking
about flash memory in particular.
So you need to be very aware of
these particular issues as you
dive in to do performance analysis.
And it's important to remember
that the iPhone is not your Mac.
It's not your Mac desktop.
It's not your Mac laptop.
It's incredibly powerful for its size.
But remember,
it's not a 64-bit Core 2 Duo.
So with performance being so important,
it's important that you have a
tool to help you along the way to
make sure that your analysis is
both easy to do and comprehensive.
So to help you with that,
we have a tool that we call Instruments.
As I mentioned before,
Instruments helps bring
context to your analysis.
It helps you understand what your
application as a whole is doing.
Now, in traditional performance analysis,
you tend to find yourself
usually looking at one thing.
So, for example,
you might be looking at the
timing of your application,
seeing where you're spending
time in your call stack.
And often, what you end up with is just a
series of data along the way.
Things pop up, you notice them,
you deal with them.
But oftentimes, it's not the whole story.
And what Instruments helps you to do
is to take data from multiple sources,
record them at the same
time in your application,
and correlate that data together
so that you can be sure that you're
honing in on exactly what the
problem is in your application.
Now the interface for Instruments
is really rather welcoming.
First,
we start you off with a set of templates.
We have Mac OS X templates for
doing analysis on Mac OS X,
and also an iPhone set of templates.
And you'll notice we've got some
commonality between the two,
things such as Sampler, Activity Monitor,
Leaks, Object Alloc.
These are all tools that you can
use to analyze things like memory,
like where you're spending
time in your application.
But the iPhone also adds a few
instruments for you to do your analysis.
You'll notice we have a
Core Animation Instrument template,
as well as an OpenGL ES template.
So you can make sure that you're
getting the most out of the
graphics hardware on iPhone.
So you simply select an
instrument from this template,
and we populate what we call your trace
document directly with that instrument.
Now from there,
you have a lot of options in
configuring the kind of data that
you want to get from that instrument.
It varies from instrument to instrument,
depending on what data
is available to it.
You can also, though,
control how you want to
view that data as well.
Now, beyond just these templates,
we also have a wide library
so that you can pick exactly
the right tool for the job.
When you start recording
your application,
you get a live timeline to show you
exactly what's happening in your
application from these different sources.
And again,
they're correlated in time so that
you can go back and figure out
which events happened together.
From here, you can select an instrument
and data mine deeply into it to
figure out exactly what happened.
In the case of ObjectAlloc,
we can even see exactly where
an instance came from in our
call site and when it happened.
So we can trace down any
memory issues very precisely.
So now the best thing about Instruments
is that you can still use it when
you're using the iPhone simulator.
So as you're rapidly prototyping
your application and bringing it up,
you can still be doing analysis along
the way to make sure that you're
delivering the best application possible.
So there are a few things that
make sense to analyze in the
simulator and a few that don't.
So let's talk about those.
So the first are memory issues.
Your memory performance between
iPhone simulator and the iPhone
itself shouldn't vary too greatly.
You're not going to see some object
get over-released on the simulator,
but not on the phone.
So if you find yourself
having memory problems,
it's completely valid to use
the simulator and instruments
to track these down.
You can also use the simulator to get
rough ideas of the general algorithmic
complexity of your application.
So if you want to start feeding
in large data sets and understand
how well you scale with that,
you can use the sampler instrument to
gain a really good understanding of it.
You can also use Dtrace with Instruments.
Now,
some of the functionality in Instruments
is actually powered by Dtrace,
but you can also write custom scripts
to get to precisely the information
that you want in your application.
Some things that don't make sense
to profile in the simulator are
things such as wall clock time.
Again, you're running on the
Core 2 Duo on your desktop.
You're not running on
the processor on iPhone.
So your timings are going
to be inherently different.
Other things you don't want to analyze
are things that rely on just the
general hardware on iPhone itself.
Things like the graphics subsystem,
for example.
You're going to want to
analyze those on iPhone.
Now we make it easy in your
project to get up and running
with your performance analysis.
You can simply go to the Run menu,
select Start with Performance Tool,
and select one of the templates
to jump right into Instruments.
And now, I'd like to bring Clark back
on stage to give you a brief
demo of Instruments in action.
Clark?
Thanks, Mike.
Okay, here I have another sample project,
and I'd like to analyze
it in Instruments.
I'm going to be searching
for memory leaks.
So I'll go to the Run menu,
choose Start with Performance Tool.
And as you can see,
here are a list of instrument
templates that I can use.
I want to use the Leaks template.
Selecting that will launch Instruments,
which will in turn launch my
application in the simulator.
Instruments starts recording
data about my application,
including the total
amount of memory used.
Sometimes it needs administrator access.
The total amount of memory used,
as well as any leaks it's found so far.
It'll scan periodically to find any
blocks of memory that are unreferenced
and therefore are likely leaks.
So while Instruments is recording data,
I just interact with my
application as I normally would.
Add things, remove things,
move things around.
And there,
you see a spike in the leaks instrument.
Okay,
I'm going to stop my application and
go to inspect what was going on there.
I select the leaks instrument,
and as you can see, a single object,
an NS object of 16 bytes in size,
was leaked.
If I select that object and
then click this button to
open the extended detail view,
I'll see a stack trace of exactly
where that object was allocated.
This can be incredibly helpful in
tracking down these memory leaks.
If I scroll towards the bottom of the
stack trace and find the last stack
frame that is in my code that I'm
responsible for and double-click on that,
it'll take me back to
Xcode directly to the leak.
There it is.
Wonder how that got in there.
I'll fix my bug.
Start with the Performance Tool again.
It's time it launches again.
Interact with it as before.
Delete, move, add.
And as you can see,
no leak was registered.
I fixed that bug.
Thank you, and back to slides.
Thank you, Clark.
So you can see,
Instruments makes it easy for
you to analyze your application.
So we've got a ton of sessions
on Instruments and its related
technologies coming up this week.
So on Wednesday,
we have a session that's getting
started with Instruments to take
you through a general acclimation
to the application so you understand
exactly how to get the most out of it.
On Thursday, we'll have Debugging and
Profiling Your iPhone Application.
In that session,
we're going to focus specifically
on the tips and techniques that you
can employ to make sure that you're
writing well-performing iPhone apps.
Now, if you want to start taking a look
at the Mac OS X side of things,
especially in regards to the simulator,
we've got a couple sessions this week
that are going to focus specifically
on DTrace and on Instruments and
how it interacts with DTrace and
how you can take advantage of
DTrace from within Instruments.
So we have Using DTrace on
Mac OS X on Thursday and
Advanced Performance Analysis with
Instruments and DTrace Friday morning.
It will be great sessions.
I highly recommend that you attend them.
Okay, so we've talked a little bit
about performance analysis,
but now we need to talk about what you
all have been waiting for all this time,
which is getting your
application on the device itself.
So, chances are you've probably
got a team that you work with.
It's probably not this team,
and they probably don't wear suits,
but you probably have a
team that you work with.
Or at the very least,
you've got multiple devices that
you like to use in your development.
So, the problem is you need to get your
application onto these devices.
But iPhone development is a little bit
different from Macintosh development.
You can't just write a development
version of your application and
send it out to as many phones as you
want and have it run immediately.
So why is this the case, though?
Why is there this limitation?
Well,
it's all about protecting our users.
It's important that debug versions of
both development versions of applications
aren't put out there in the wild to
put users' data at risk or to put the
cellular network at risk in general.
It's important that we allow
them to make sure that they're
using their phone as a phone.
Now, along with this, though,
you still have the need of
getting your development done.
So in order to move
applications to the device,
there's two things that we need from you.
Only two things.
We need to know the devices
that you want to develop with,
And we need you to sign your
applications so that we know
that they've come from you.
So first, we're going to focus on the
devices side of the story.
So every iPhone that rolls
off the factory line,
an iPod touch,
has built into it a unique identifier.
We call this a UDID or a UDID.
Now, this unique identifier you'll
be able to find within Xcode.
And all you need to do is gather up the
unique identifiers for your development
iPhones and send them off to Apple so
that we know that these devices are going
to be used for development purposes.
You can do this quickly and easily
through the iPhone Developer Portal.
Simply log in.
Add your iPhones by adding in
your UDIDs and giving them a name,
and you're good to go.
That's all we need to
know about the devices.
But now we need to focus on signing.
So, to talk about signing,
we should take a step back for
a second and really briefly talk
about asymmetric key cryptography.
Now, please don't get scared.
We don't need to go in any depth on this.
But it's important that you understand
at least the basic principles here.
So in asymmetric key cryptography,
you've got a private
key and a public key.
And you hand this public key out
freely to as many people as you want.
And you use this private
key to do various things,
such as sign data or encrypt data.
Now, once you've done that,
users can later use your public key to
ensure that the data is as you sent it,
that it wasn't changed while in transit,
or use it to decrypt that data.
So when you're signing
your iPhone application,
you're essentially taking
a snapshot of it in time.
And you're saying that, saying that I,
Michael Jurewitz,
swear that the application looked like
this at the time that I signed it.
And when you go to put
the application on iPhone,
the iPhone is going to actually check
to make sure that that's the case,
and that the application
has not been modified,
at which point it'll
launch your application.
So to create these keys that you need,
we start with Keychain Access.
You'll find this in your
Utilities folder on Mac OS X.
We simply need to create a certificate
request and fill in the appropriate data.
After we've done that,
we'll actually generate a file that we
send off to the iPhone Developer Program.
And what Apple does--
so the question is here,
what just happened here?
We just pasted this random
data into this website.
Well, you made a public and a private
key when you created this request.
And you sent this
public key off to Apple.
And what we do is make sure that
you are who you say you are,
that no one is trying to
pretend that they are you.
And if so,
we hand you back a certificate.
And this basically lets us tell the world
that if you receive this public key,
we at Apple verify that it is
truly associated with this person.
So with this certificate,
you'll be able to download
this from the iPhone program
portal once it's been approved.
If you have a team that
you're working with,
they'll also submit certificate requests,
and you as a team lead can very quickly
and easily approve them so that they
can get on with their development.
Now, it's especially important that
you safeguard these certificates
once you get them back from Apple.
In Keychain Access,
they're all grouped together,
but you need to make sure that
you are backing up both your
private and your public key,
and that you do not give
these out to anyone.
Someone who has your private
key can pretend to be you,
and you don't want that.
Trust me.
Okay, but we still need to get the
application onto the device.
So the last step in here is
to actually create what we
call a provisioning profile.
And you do that again through
the iPhone program portal.
And a provisioning profile is essentially
a single file that encapsulates which
certificates and which iPhones can
be used together for development.
So, for example,
if Rick and I were on a team,
both of our certificates would
be in the profile and both of the
devices that we use would be there,
too.
That way,
Rick could build and sign an application
and I could run it on my phone.
I could build and sign an application
and he could run it on his.
Again, now one additional step is you'll
create also a bundle identifier for
either your suite of applications
or your specific application itself.
And this just uniquely identifies
your app so that we can isolate it
from the rest of the world for things
like preferences in the keychain.
Now you download this
provisioning profile to your Mac,
you drag it to Xcode,
and you're good to go.
But we have all these devices
now that we have to interact with
and we have to use in some way,
but we need a tool to help us to do that.
So what are we going to use?
Well, I'd like to bring Rick back on
stage to tell you just what that is.
Thanks, Mike.
In Xcode 3.0, we introduced a tool we
called the Organizer.
And the Organizer is used to manage some
frequently accessed source files and
do some inline editing for convenience.
But in Xcode 3.1,
we've taken it a bit further and made
it the hub of your device management.
This is the Organizer.
It has your devices on the left and
detailed information on the right.
You can get to the Organizer
from any time by going to Xcode,
going to its window menu,
and choosing Organizer.
When you first plug in your device,
Xcode will bring up a window asking
if you want to use it for development.
If you confirm, your device will be added
to the Devices list on the
left-hand side of the organizer.
So here, we just click the button,
Xcode has read in what my iPhone is,
and boom, there it is on the left.
If we highlight in on
the devices section,
you can see I have three
phones plugged in here,
one of which is grayed out.
One has a red dot, one has a green.
Well, grayed out devices are those
that you've chosen to ignore
when you first plug it in.
You say you don't want to
use it for development.
So if you've got a personal phone
that you're plugging in that you're
not doing any development with,
say ignore.
And when it's plugged in,
Xcode will acknowledge that it's
not to be paid attention to.
Red phones are those that you
have used for development,
but don't currently have plugged in.
And when you plug in a device
that is used for development,
it'll show up with a green dot on
the left and allow you to edit all
the information you want about it.
If you delete-- oh, sorry about that.
If you delete a phone
from the left-hand side,
you can plug it back in and
choose Use for Development again
or Ignore if you've changed your
mind about how it should work.
So here, I've just deleted one.
And when I plug it back in,
the dialog pops back up and
lets me decide that I want to
use this phone for development.
In the upper section of the organizer,
you see some vital stats on your phone,
like the name, its capacity,
its serial number, most importantly,
that identifier or UDID that
Mike Jurewitz mentioned.
When you need to know
the UDIDs of your phone,
you'll want to come to the
organizer to read them.
You can also find the software version
that you have loaded onto your iPhone.
And if you want to upgrade
your iPhone to a newer version,
you can do it right within Organizer
by clicking on the OS version
pop-up and choosing Other,
finding an iPhone software restore file,
an IPSW file,
and loading it into the organizer.
When you do this, the organizer grabs it,
copies it in,
and will know about it in the future.
So you can choose it from the
dropdown and click Restore when you
want to upgrade to that OS version.
In the middle,
we have provisioning information.
So that provisioning profile that you
got from Apple that you need to use to
let you run your apps on your device,
you'll want to configure here.
When you get a mobile
provision file from Apple,
if you just drag it onto Xcode's dock,
it'll become available for
all your devices to use.
And when you decide you want
to use a given provisioning
profile with a given device,
all you need to do is check the box,
and the organizer will upload your
profile into your device for your use.
At the bottom of the organizer,
we have a section that lets you inspect
the applications that you currently have
that you've uploaded onto your device.
You can easily add or
remove applications here,
or you can inspect the
application data that each has.
If you click the download icon
next to the application data,
the organizer will let you
actually download the applications
data folder from your phone
and put it right on your Mac.
So here we click it,
we choose where we want
to save the data file,
and once we've done so,
the organizer will even add it
to the upper left-hand corner
where it manages some frequently
accessed files for your convenience.
That data folder is your application's
home folder on the phone.
If you look, it contains both a document
subdirectory and a library subdirectory,
which contains, among other things,
your preferences.
So you've got your apps on your phone.
You've maybe been using
it around beta testing it,
out living on it for a while,
and maybe your app has a few crashes.
You're going to want to get
that information back to your
developer's tools somehow so
you can find and fix your bugs.
The organizer-- we'll
get to that in a second,
actually.
The organizer is also your
equivalent of console.
So for Mac apps,
console gives all the console
logging for all the applications
running on your computer.
For all the logging
running on your device,
you want to use the organizer,
which will show you
everything as it goes by,
allow you to filter as needed,
and save out log files that
you may find interesting later.
So when your applications crash,
then you want to use the crash logs.
When you go to this section,
the organizer will automatically download
any crash logs that your phone has
accumulated since you last plugged it in.
And it will automatically try
to symbolicate them for you.
So instead of having a stack trace
with just unreadable addresses,
you'll have your nice method
and function names so you can
easily tell what went wrong.
In order to let the organizers
symbolicate your stack traces,
you'll want to keep around the
binaries and their associated
symbolic information files,
or .dsim files,
for any application that you'll
want to symbolicate later.
So long as the built binary and
.dsim file that is exactly what was
running on your phone is somewhere
on your Mac that Spotlight can index,
the organizer will find it automatically
and symbolicate your crash traces.
If an application crashes that
you don't have that information
available to spotlight in,
you'll find that your application
stack frames are not symbolicated,
and you'll know why.
The organizer provides a useful
utility for taking screenshots as well.
It's very easy.
You just click the Capture button,
and it records exactly
what's on your phone.
If you want to set a default image,
click Capture,
it records exactly what's on your phone.
If you want to set a default
image so that when your
phone application launches,
it appears responsive
and comes up immediately,
you can also take a screenshot
of the image that you want to
come up and click the Save as
Default Image button in Xcode.
And Xcode will automatically
add it to your project for you,
so that when you launch your application,
your next build and go,
that will be the initial image.
This isn't meant to give you
the ability to add splash
screens to your application.
It's just so that your application
comes up immediately showing the
interface that it will use as soon
as it actually starts running.
So once we've finished configuring
your application in the organizer,
we're going to want to go and actually
start building and running on the
device instead of in the simulator.
To do this,
you're going to want to investigate
Xcode's new overview pop-up
in the upper left-hand corner.
The overview pop-up gives you at
your fingertips access to controls
for exactly what will happen
when you press Build and Go.
You can change which target you're
going to start to build with,
what configuration you're going to build,
or for this purpose,
you can change the active SDK from
your simulator SDK to the device SDK.
Once you've done so,
the next time you build and go,
your iPhone application will rebuild
for iPhone OS and automatically
upload and run on the device.
What if you have multiple
devices plugged in?
Well, the overview pop-up
lets you choose as well.
For each device you have plugged in,
provision for development,
you'll see an executable
in the overview pop-up.
And to change which device
is running your application,
you just change which
executable is selected.
That's all it takes to get up
and running with your devices.
Let's see how it looks when
you want to dive into analyzing
on the phone with Instruments.
I'd like to invite Clark back
up to show us how to do it.
All right, I've got a project here that,
as you can see,
is configured to build for the device.
I'm going to,
like before with the simulator,
choose Start with Performance Tool.
And since my application is
an OpenGL ES application,
I want to gather some
OpenGL statistics about it.
I'll launch that.
Instruments will launch and in turn,
upload the application to my
device and start it running.
Even though you can't see this,
it is a pretty fun little game.
I'll play around, shoot some things,
see how it affects the frame rate.
Well,
obviously something is going wrong here.
So, to track that down,
I'll come back into Instruments.
Going to stop my application.
And to focus on the actual problem,
I'll option drag and select the region
where I had that abysmal frame rate.
Now, as the OpenGL ES instrument was
collecting OpenGL statistics,
Sampler was also collecting
information about what my
code was doing at that time.
So if I select the Sampler instrument,
bring up the extended
detail view as before,
I can look through these samples and
look for a stack trace that looks
like I'm responsible for the problem.
Here we see this missile render
function is calling NSLOG.
It doesn't seem likely that I should
be logging from a render function.
So, again, I'll double-click on this,
it'll take me directly to the source,
and indeed, there's my problem.
Now, this is obviously a
pretty contrived problem,
but you can use the exact same
techniques to track down real
problems in your application,
and hopefully getting it running
and performant on the device.
Thank you, and back to slides.
All right, thank you, Clark.
I promise you, we never have bugs like
that in our own software.
All right, so we've talked a bit about
using instruments on the device.
There's one tool we
haven't talked about yet,
Shark.
So now,
Shark is another one of our performance
tools for getting instruction-level
accuracy in your profiling,
so that as you're doing time profiling
of your application on iPhone to
understand where it's spending time,
you're doing so with incredibly
low overhead and high accuracy.
When we look at the Shark interface,
it's pretty simple.
If you've seen general backtraces
or the sample application,
it's pretty familiar.
In this trace document,
we can see on the left-hand side
where we're spending time as
a percentage of our execution.
On the right-hand side,
we see the call stacks.
We know exactly where we were when
that happened and what had called what.
So now using Shark for iPhone
development is pretty simple,
but there's a little bit of
setup we have to do first.
So we'll go to Shark's
Preferences and bring that up.
And then we need to go to our
search paths and make sure that
Shark knows where to find our
source files and our DSIM files,
our symbol information.
So we'll select our source
files and hit the plus button.
It'll bring up a little dialogue for us.
We'll tell it where our sample
application happens to reside.
In this case,
it's our metronome application.
And add that to the search paths.
Now we'll also go to our symbol-rich
files and make sure that Shark knows
where to look for our DSIMs.
Again, we'll click the plus button,
navigate to where our symbol files are,
and click open.
Now, you can install the Xcode
Developer Tools wherever
you want on your system.
So, if you haven't installed
them at /developer,
we need to make sure that
Shark is aware of this.
So you can go ahead and double-click on
the path for the iPhone OS frameworks
and change the leading /developer to
whatever the name of the developer
folder it is that you chose.
In this case, Xcode 3.1.
In this way,
Shark will be able to look at
the iPhone OS call stacks and
understand which symbols in iPhone
were being called at that time.
From there, Shark's pretty easy to use.
We simply engage
Network iPhone Profiling,
and we get an extended interface.
When we've got the device plugged in,
we'll see it listed here in the window.
Now, we can use this then to
select what we want to sample.
In this case, we'll select our metronome
application from the pop-up.
We can then select what kind
of profiling we want to do.
In this case,
we're just going to do a time profile,
which is just figuring out where we're
spending our time in our application.
We click Start,
we do what we want to do in our app,
and we're done.
We simply click Stop.
Shark comes up and will tell us
exactly where we were spending time,
and will do so without affecting
the performance of your application.
Now, you can double-click on any port
in these call stacks and jump
exactly to the line and source
that's responsible for that call.
You can also dig down and see
the assembly view if you want to
see exactly which instructions
were happening at a given time.
There's also some chart facilities in
Shark so that you can see your call
stacks in time and understand general
behavioral issues at a higher level.
So that's Shark.
Really a very powerful tool.
There's an incredible amount
of surface area that we don't
have time to get into right now.
But we do have a couple
sessions later on this week and
even today to get into that.
So for those of you who are
experienced with Mac development,
we have advanced profiling techniques,
performance profiling
techniques with Shark.
This will be at 5:00 p.m.
today in Marina.
It's a great presentation if
you're familiar with Shark but
want to dig in a bit deeper.
and later on this week,
we'll have a more introductory
session on Thursday,
Performance Tuning
Your Application with Shark.
And this will be a great introduction if
you're curious about more of the tool,
how it works, and how you can use it
for your application.
So we've been through a tour of the
developer tools and shown you what you
need to do and all the tools that you
can use for your iPhone development.
You've seen that they're very
similar to Mac development,
and that they're there to help speed
you along and keep you moving forward.
For more information,
please feel free to email
me at jurewitz@apple.com.
We've also got a rich
set of documentation,
whether on the iPhone OS, Xcode,
Interface Builder, Instruments, or Shark.
So please see our
developer website as well.